Panel Summary

SUMMARY OF PROPOSED RESEARCH ACTIVITY

This proposal seeks to address several important and challenging
shortcomings of the verified C compiler, CompCert. Specifically, it
seeks to extend CompCert to support verified compositional compilation
and linking with heterogeneous components; change to a nominal memory
model to ease support for compositionality and concurrency; extend
verified compilation of open programs down to ELF object files and
build a verified linker and loader; and finally add support for secure
compilation.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT

Strengths

+ The panel agreed that the proposed work would be valuable as it
would yield an end-to-end verified compiler that is compositional,
supports secure compilation, supports verified linking with
heterogeneous components, and handles concurrency.

+ The PIs are well prepared to do this work as they have worked on
several prior results that this work will build on: CompCertO, Nominal
CompCert, Stack-Aware CompCert, and others.

Weaknesses

- The panel thought that many of the conceptual challenges of the
  first three research thrusts have already been tackled by the PIs'
  prior work. It was not clear, therefore, that those aspects of the
  proposed work have the potential to significantly advance knowledge
  in the field.

- The panel thought that the proposal should provide more detail on
  certain aspects of the evaluation plan. Specifically, the proposal
  says the verified compiler will be used to build enhanced versions
  of several existing certfied systems but it does not explain exactly
  what those advances will include or how those systems would be made
  better or richer.

BROADER IMPACTS

Strengths

+ The development of a compositional verified compiler toolchain for C
will have broad impact on building large-scale heterogenous verified
systems software.

+ The results of this research will inform the development of a new
course on formal semantics and the revision of another course on
language-based security that will make the results of this research
more accessible to a broader group of students.


SOLICITATION-SPECIFIC REVIEW CRITERIA

The collaboration plan is good. The PIs are at the same institution
and already have a history of working together.

BPC PLAN

The BPC plan is meaningful. However, it is focused on institutional
efforts and the panel wondered which specific activities the co-PI
would engage in.


SUGGESTIONS FOR IMPROVEMENT

- The panel thought the proposal should elaborate on the fundamental
  research challenges that would be addressed by the integration work
  involved in the first three research thrusts.

- The panel thought that the proposed work on secure compilation would
  be highly valuable, but the PIs' approach to that work is not
  discussed in sufficient detail in the proposal.

- The proposal should explain the overlap between this project and
  ongoing technology transfer efforts.


SUMMARY STATEMENT

The proposed work has the potential to make significant progress on
some of the most challenging problems that remain in verified
compilation, namely compositional secure compilation with support for
concurrency. Although the proposal does build on a lot of the PIs'
prior work, integrating those ideas cleanly into CompCert will yield a
verified compiler that can be used in many other large-scale
heterogenous verification efforts. The proposal would be stronger if
it had more clearly explained its approach to the most exciting piece
of new work, namely secure compilation, and clarified the fundamental
new research challenges addressed by the first three research thrusts.

The recommendation of the panel is that the proposal is Competitive.

The summary was read by/to the panel and the panel concurred that the
summary accurately reflects the panel discussion.  PANEL
RECOMMENDATION: Competitive

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Proposal Review 1 : 2212026

Rating: Good

Review Summary

In the context of the five review elements, please evaluate the
strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to intellectual
merit.

This proposal describes a project to extend the verified C Compiler
CompCert along two key dimensions (1) use of game semantics to enable
compositional compiler correctness, (2) a memory model based on
nominal sets that is more suited to certain optimizations/proofs.

Strengths:

- The PIs are a strong team for this task; Zhao's work on CompCert
  extensions and variants is extensive, Koenig's dissertation covers
  one of these extension areas.

- The proposed work is a nice example of "applied semantics": taking
  ideas that have been developed in the theoretical PL semantics
  community and using them to extend an important verified
  system. Besides its own direct benefits, one might hope that this
  could spark further theoretical work on those techniques, or
  influence other applied uses.

Weaknesses:

- The preliminary work on CompCertO and Nominal Compcert (published
  recently in POPL/PLDI) seems to cover much of the conceptual
  challenges of this research direction that would seem to have a
  large effect on advancing knowledge within the field. E.g. looking
  at 1.4 "Intellectual Merit" -- large parts of the first 3 bullets
  have been successfully tackled by the PIs already, albeit in
  separate projects that were not integrated into one unified
  whole. While building a unified artifact may have practical broader
  impacts, it is less clear how it will advance understanding of these
  techniques.

Suggestion for improvement:

- The proposal does a good job explaining why the merger of the
  different projects/directions under consideration here would be more
  than "the sum of its parts" in terms of broader impact, but an
  explanation of why that is so as well for intellectual merit would
  improve the proposal.

In the context of the five review elements, please
evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to broader impacts.

Strengths:

- CompCert is often used as a "target" for other work in software
  verification, under the pretense that it is a trustworthy foundation
  for extending the guarantees of verification. However, in many of
  these use cases, CompCert's correctness theorem doesn't exactly
  apply to the situation under consideration. The proposal would
  extend CompCert and its correctness theorem in several important
  ways that would make it actually be applicable in these cases.

Weaknesses:

- There has been extensive work on compositional compiler
  verification, some in CompCert, some in other verified systems, and
  others on paper. The proposal acknowledges the existence of this
  other work, but the key limitation mentioned for work using
  contextual approaches is that, to support different hardware, the
  hardware models need to be included in the contexts under
  consideration to make their behavior observable. The proposal says
  that this approach does not scale. -- but it doesn't explain why,
  and the reviewer is not convinced. It seems as if one could
  parameterize by these external hardware interfaces and the
  operations they support, much as CompCert's language and semantics
  already is parameterized by the external C standard library
  operations.

Please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with
respect to any additional solicitation-specific review criteria, if
applicable

Collaboration: The PIs have extensive past collaboration history, and
the described plan is sound.

BPC:

> Context: Does the plan describe a goal using institutional or local data?

Yes.

> Intended population(s): Does the plan identify the characteristics
  of participants from an underrepresented group listed in Section II
  of the solicitation, including school level (e.g., African-American
  undergraduates or female high-school students)?

Yes.

> Strategy: Does the plan describe activities that address the goal(s)
  and intended population(s)? Is there a clear role for each PI and
  co-PI?

Yes for PI Zhao. The role of co-PI Koenig was less clear for some activities.

> Preparation: Does the plan describe how the PI is prepared (or will
  prepare or collaborate) to do the proposed work?

Yes.

> Measurement: Is there a plan to measure the outcome(s) of the activities?

Yes.

Summary Statement

I rate this proposal a "Good" because while I think the broader
impacts of having a verified tool incorporating all of the PIs'
preliminary ideas here would be a useful artifact for other users of
CompCert, the weaknesses described in the intellectual merit section
of review prevent me from advocating strongly for it.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Proposal Review 2 : 2212026

Rating: Very Good

Review Summary

In the context of the five review elements, please evaluate the
strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to intellectual
merit.

The proposal is to develop a compositional version of CompCert based
on nominal techniques. The proposed work extends existing work by the
PIs and others on projects like CompCertX (which as tied closely to
CertiKOS, a verified operating system kernel), and CompCertO, a
verified compiler for open C components (PLDI'21).

The general approach is to use game semantics to model the interfaces
at component boundaries. For example, an interface of type A -> B
describes an interaction initiated and closed by questions/answers of
type B, and implemented by external calls (answer/response pairs) of
type A. Transition systems are then attached to these game types, with
L : A -->> B (for example) describing strategies for playing A ->
B. More concretely, this setup makes it possible to model programs
that are open with respect to components in the same language, e.g.,
Asm -->> Asm, for assembly programs that call other assembly programs,
or Asm -->> C for C programs that make external calls to functions
implemented in assembly. The `Asm` and `C` in these types are called
"language interfaces", and describe the calling convention for each
language at the appropriate level of abstraction for that
language. Simulations are lifted to transition systems like L1 : A1
-->> B1 and L2 : A2 -->> B2 by defining Kripke relations (indexed by
the current world, which could be a representation of the current
stack) over the interfaces A1\times A2 and B1\times B2.

In this context, the work that's specifically proposed breaks down
into three main categories:

1. Improvements of CompCertO, including work on improved modeling of
symbol tables (CompCert's Genv), lifting simulation results
("simulation conventions" in the language of the proposal) to trace
properties; and work to upstream parts of CompCertO and Nominal
CompCert into CompCert proper

2. Integration of work on Nominal CompCert (which uses nominal
techniques to generalize CompCert's block-based memory model) with the
work on CompCertO, and on generalizations, such as to multithreaded
programs

3. Connecting the work on CompCertO to other work (CompCertELF) that
lowers CompCert's assembly-level target language down to machine code
(ELF binaries)

4. Applications: Using CompCertO to implement Concurrent Certified
Abstraction Layers (CCAL) and applying results to secure compilation.

Ultimately, the various threads culminate in Nominal CompCertO, a
verified compiler built on CompCert that uses a nominal memory model,
supports compilation of open components, supports multithreading, and
lowers program correctness all the way to ELF binaries.

STRENGTHS

There's a lot of interesting work proposed here. There is intellectual
merit in extending the work on game-semantics based compiler
verification passed what was done in CompCertO: to multithreading,
lowering to ELF, etc. Some of the proposed work, like the extensions
of CompCertELF, could be sustainable as (Small) projects on their
own. Applying Nominal CompCertO to verified systems projects such as
SeKVM, as was previously done when CompCertX was used to compile
CertiKOS, is likely to unveil interesting research questions. This
goes to BI to some extent, but I imagine that certain pieces of the
proposed work -- like the nominal memory model -- could be accepted as
contributions upstream to CompCert, as happened for CompCertM (the
proposal notes that it intends to at least attempt this
upstreaming). That could have ripple effects on parts of the formal
methods community (many projects reuse parts of CompCert, like the
memory model and integer library).

WEAKNESSES

The proposal is ambitious. This isn't necessarily a weakness, but it
highlights a slight deficiency of the proposal as written, that it
fails to very clearly tie together all the research strands. Most task
in isolation are spelled out reasonably well (i.e., the work on
CompCertELF). But some of the connections between the strands are
underspecified.

For example: "We believe that the language interfaces in CompCertO and
the richer permutation support ... can provide a better and cleaner
solution toward a certified linker and loader." [p16] I wondered here
which parts of CompCertO and the nominal memory model make it easier
to verify a linker. The proposal would be strengthened by expanding on
these sorts of connections between the research tasks.

Some of the challenges and tasks lacked details. For example, "We will
use this approach to mechanize the verification of a simple
heterogeneous system" [p17]. Which one? If you apply the techniques to
verify something like the example network driver at the beginning of
the proposal, there's significant work (not described/planned) on
building inputs to the verification, like models of the hardware
device/NIC itself. These applications aren't the primary focus of the
proposal but do deserve a bit more detail. Another less critical
example, on "automation support [for] building certified instruction
encoders and decoders" [p16], what would this entail? How would the
instruction encoders integrate into CompCertELF? (Presumably, they're
an input to the correctness proof of the linker.)

The extension to secure compilation is interesting but seems extremely
ambitious and lacks details (this work, again, could potentially be an
independent Small project).

In the context of the five review elements, please evaluate the
strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to broader
impacts.

STRENGTHS

+ The game semantics-based approach to compiler verification is
interesting. Further work beyond the CompCertO paper to test the
limits of the technique would be useful to researchers working on
verified compilation.

+ Some of the techniques, like the new nominal memory model for
CompCert, seem like good candidates for upstreaming, and therefore
broader use.

+ PI Shao has a record of technology transfer to industry (CertiK).


WEAKNESSES

- While there's a high-level plan to incorporate tools like Nominal
  CompCertO into classes at Yale, it lacks details. How do the PIs
  propose to incorporate the compiler into the formal semantics
  course? What sorts of assignments? Is it just graduate students (in
  which case the integration is likely easier) or does the course also
  have undergraduates?

- While the PIs have open sourced much of their work (which is
  great!), I was unable to find source code for components like
  CertiKOS. It would improve the BI potential of the proposal if
  components like CertiKOS, on which the work depends, were easily
  available going forward.

Please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with
respect to any additional solicitation-specific review criteria, if
applicable

STRENGTHS

+ The BPC plan includes a detailed list of proposed activities,
including data collection and measurement to assess the effectiveness
of the activities wrt. increasing participation in computing of
underrepresented groups.

+ While some activities are generic, others are specific to the
project and the proposed research, like offering tutorials on verified
compilation at conferences with the goal of attracting more women and
people from URGs to apply to the computer science program at Yale.

+ The department appears to support the goal of BPC, and has set
specific targets like increasing the percentage of people from URGs on
the CS faculty by 25% by 2025.

WEAKNESSES

- While some activities specific to the proposed research are planned,
  more could be done to tailor the BPC activities to the research.

Summary Statement

This is an ambitious proposal. It seeks to extend existing work on
game semantics-based compiler verification to nominal techniques for
memory, and to lower guarantees on open components below CompCert's
current assembly targets to verified ELF binaries. I raise some slight
concerns above, e.g., on the plan to integrate the various tasks and
on details of some of the proposed applications. Overall, however, I'm
quite positive on the potential of the proposed work to increase the
state-of-the-art in compiler verification.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Proposal Review 3 : 2212026

Rating: Good

Review Summary

In the context of the five review elements, please evaluate the
strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to intellectual
merit.

The project will advance knowledge and understanding within the field
of certified compilation as a result of both the new theoretical
foundations and the practical tools that will be developed. The work
on compositional compiler correctness will provide new tools to
account for the interfaces between low-level system components as well
as some novel semantic tools based on game theoretic ideas. The work
to clean up the CompCert memory model should have independent value to
other people who are building on CompCert by eliminating some
unfortunate design choices in the original implementation.

The project plans seem to be well-organized, based on sound rationale,
and generally include satisfactory methods for assessing success. One
exception to the latter is some vagueness in stating the evaluation
criteria in Section 6. For example, the text indicates that the
verified compositional compiler will be used to build “much more
powerful OS kernels”, as well as “more extensible hypervisors with
smaller TCBs and richer features”, but there are no specific details
to describe these goals more precisely. Similarly, there is an
expectation that the new compiler will be used to “enhance DeepSEA
with better support for concurrency and name-space management”, but
there is no description of possible experiments that might be used to
assess those claims.

The PIs are very well qualified to conduct the work described in the
proposal, as demonstrated by an extensive record of successful
research and past publications in related areas. The project does not
require special facilities or resources beyond standard computing
equipment that is presumably already supplied by the host institution.


In the context of the five review elements, please evaluate the
strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to broader
impacts.

In addition to the core research contributions, this project will also
inform the development of a new course on formal semantics and the
revision of another course on language based security that will make
the results of this research more accessible to a broader group of
students.

The proposal also outlines technology transfer pathways through a
startup company that includes one of the PIs as a founder, and through
a DARPA V-SPELLS project. This provides some exciting opportunities,
but it would also be helpful to understand whether either of these
partner efforts, each of which stands to benefit from the work that
will be done in this project, has also made any commitment to
contribute to or otherwise support the proposed work.


Please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with
respect to any additional solicitation-specific review criteria, if
applicable

Comments on Collaboration Plan:

The collaboration plan in the proposal seems to be well thought out,
and should be effective. The fact that the PI and the Co-PI are in the
same institution will obviously allow for more direct collaboration
and interaction on a day to day basis.

Comments on BPC Plan, using elements from solicitation

1. Context: Does the plan describe a goal using institutional or local data?

Yes, the plan describes specific goals for understanding climate and
inclusiveness issues in the investigator’s department; for measuring
and improving opportunities for women and students from
underrepresented groups; and for increasing representation for the
same groups among both the student and faculty populations.

2. Intended population(s): Does the plan identify the characteristics
of participants from an underrepresented group listed in Section II of
the solicitation, including school level (e.g., African-American
undergraduates or female high-school students)?

Yes. The plan considers multiple groups that are underrepresented in
computer science, including women as well as people who identify as
Hispanic, African American, American Indian, Alaska Native, Native
Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander. The plan also considers a broad range
of community members at the investigator’s institution, including
undergraduate, masters, and doctoral students, as well as faculty
ranks.

3. Strategy: Does the plan describe activities that address the
goal(s) and intended population(s)? Is there a clear role for each PI
and co-PI?

Yes, the plan lists several specific programs that can contribute to
reaching the specified goals, and identifies particular goals within
that list as priorities for each of the PI and the Co-PI.

4. Preparation: Does the plan describe how the PI is prepared (or will
prepare or collaborate) to do the proposed work?

Yes, the plan documents some specific examples of the PI’s past work
in relation to the goals of the plan, as well as his commitment to
leading and participating in all of the BPC efforts in his capacity as
department chair.

5. Measurement: Is there a plan to measure the outcome(s) of the activities?

Yes, each of the goals has an associated list of activities and
measurements, including specific numeric and timeline goals where
appropriate.


Summary Statement

The proposed work will enhance the use of formal verification
techniques for low-level systems software with a focus on certified
compilation based on extensions of CompCert, and new theoretical
foundations to support compositional reasoning, separate compilation,
and a more flexible memory model.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Proposal Review 4 : 2212026

Rating: Very Good

Review Summary

In the context of the five review elements, please evaluate the
strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to intellectual
merit.

This proposal seeks to address several important and challenging
shortcomings of the verified C compiler, CompCert, yielding an
end-to-end verified compositional, secure compiler that supports
verified linking with heterogeneous components, and concurrency.

Strengths

+ The proposal seeks to extend CompCert to support verified
compositional compilation and linking with heterogeneous components
based on the PIs' recent work that uses ideas from game semantics and
logical relations (simulation conventions) . This is a highly
challenging problem because there is a fundamental tension between
supporting composition of components (linking) and composition of
compiler passes (transitivity of compiler correctness). The PIs have
made significant progress on how to resolve that tension, in CompCert
specifically, in recent years.

+ The proposal seeks to build on the recent nominal memory model and
NominalCompCert (POPL'22), but extend it further to ease support for
compositionality and concurrency.

+ The proposal seeks to extend verified compilation down to ELF object
files and build a verified linker and loader. The challenge is going
from a nominal memory model to a concrete memory layout. The PIs'
Stack-Aware CompCert effort already dealt with going from CompCert's
memory model to a concrete model model.

+ Adding support for secure compilation to CompCert is a challenging
problem.

+ The work will be evaluated by integrating the verified compiler into
various existing certified systems and tools yielding advanced or more
end-to-end guarantees for these systems: CertiKOS, a concurrent
certified OS kernel; SeKVM, a verified Linux KVM hypervisor; the
DeepSEA programming language; and VST, which supports
separation-logic-based verificaton of C code.

+ The PIs are experts in this area: they've been working on this
problem for many years, most recently as part of the NSF DeepSpec
Expeditions project, and the proposal will build extensively on those
efforts.


Weaknesses

- Several of the tasks outlined in proposed work seem to require more
  engineering than research at this stage -- i.e., they are about
  improving aspects of the system by integrating ideas from recent
  work by the PIs or others. This includes tasks for compositional
  verified compilation building on CompCertO: improved management of
  symbol tables (1a), extending CompCertO to multiple backends (part
  of 1b), Coq mechanization of the refinement-based game semantics
  from the PIs' LICS'20 paper (1c); integrating the work on Nominal
  CompCert (POPL'22), CompCertO (PLDI'21), and Stack-Aware CompCert
  (POPL'19) (task 3a); and also using CompCertO to implement certified
  abstraction layers (task 4b). That said, these tasks are essential
  for the end-to-end verified compositional, secure CompCert the PIs
  envision.

- The proposal says (task 3b) that a ``big part of this task is to
  leverage the rich structure from the nominal memory model to enable
  richer ABIs'', but it doesn't say what sort of ``richer'' ABIs the
  project aims to support.

- The problem of secure compilation (task 4c) is highly interesting
  and challenging but the proposal doesn't adequately explain why/how
  CompCertO's simulation conventions help with secure
  compilation. Also, it is not clear if the goal of task 4c is to
  support noninterference-preserving compilation, full abstraction, or
  preservation of some other security property.

- The overlap between the DARPA V-SPELLS project and this proposal
  should be better spelled out.

Suggestions for Improvement

* Please give some examples of what kinds of richer ABIs this research
  seeks to support. It is not clear what the goal is for task 3b.

* Please explain the goals and approach for task 4c in a bit more
  detail. Specifically, the definition of $L_1 \simeq_R L_2$ should be
  explained more as it seems important to understanding the novel
  idea/approach.


In the context of the five review elements, please evaluate the
strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to broader
impacts.

Strengths

+ The development of a compositional verified compiler toolchain for C
will have broad impact on building large-scale heterogenous verified
systems software.

+ The technology developed here will also be used in PI Shao's startup
(CertiK) to build verified smart contracts.

+ The PIs will develop a new course on formal semantics covering
topics such as game semantics, nominal techniques and verified
compilaton. The programming labs will make use of Nominal CompCertO to
provide students with hands-on experience. (Also see weaknesses.)

+ PI Shao has a long track record of training PhD students. In recent
years, he has supervised 2 female postdocs and 1 female undergraduate
who was a finalist for the CRA Undegrad Research Award.

+ The project will support the training of two PhD students.

Weaknesses

- The formal semantics course (CPSC 430) seems too advanced for undergraduates.


Suggestions for Improvement

* None


Please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with
respect to any additional solicitation-specific review criteria, if
applicable

Collaboration Plan

+ The PI and co-PI are both at Yale and have been working together for
years and have several papers together. The collaboration plan is
good.

Broadening Participation in Computing Plan

1. Context: Does the plan describe a goal using institutional or local data?

Yes

2. Intended population(s): Does the plan identify the characteristics
of participants from an underrepresented group listed in Section II of
the solicitation, including school level (e.g., African-American
undergraduates or female high-school students)?

Yes

3. Strategy: Does the plan describe activities that address the
goal(s) and intended population(s)? Is there a clear role for each PI
and co-PI?

The role of PI Shao is clear; there are several tasks he will be
involved with due to his role as CS Dept Chair. The role of co-PI
Koenig is not clearly spelled out in the BPC plan.

4. Preparation: Does the plan describe how the PI is prepared (or will
prepare or collaborate) to do the proposed work?

Yes for PI Shao.

5. Measurement: Is there a plan to measure the outcome(s) of the activities?

Yes


Summary Statement

This proposal should be funded as it has the potential to make
significant progress on some of the most challenging problems that
remain in verified compilation, namely compositional secure
compilation with support for concurrency. Although the proposal does
build on a lot of recent work, integrating those ideas cleanly into
CompCert will yield a verified compiler that can be used in many other
large-scale heterogenous verification efforts.
